# Lecture 4 - Memory and Addresses

## REMEMBER
* loads copy from memory to registers
* stores copy from registers to memory
* datapath can access the registers, and does the processing within the processor 

# Memory
## What is the memory?
* Persistent storage = FILES (not what Jarrett is referring to) - big, but slow
  * non-volatile storage
* System memory = running rpograms, variables (small, but faster)
  * system registers are volatile
* Memory = 
  * a big one-dimensional array of bytes
  * what do these bytes mean?
      * ¯\_(ツ)_/¯ i dunno lol
  * when each byte has its own address, we call it a byte-addressable machine (could alternatively be a word-addressable <- not common)
  * we do not measure memory data or address in bits
  * the byte is like the atom in the data

## How much memory
* on an n-bit byte-addressable architecture
  * addressses are n-bit numbers*
  * each addresss refers to one byte
  * so how many bytes can your CPU access?
    * n bits
    * 2^n 
    * 2^32 bytes = 4GiB
* prefixes - kilo vs. kibi, mega vs. mebi, giga vs. gibi, tera vs tebi
  * 10^x or 2^x

# Values bigger than a byte
* how do we store words (32-bits)?
  * we make groups 
  * when we load a value, the CPU reassembles the byte into a word
    * the CPU handles this for you
* the address of any value is the address of its first byte

# Endianness
* endianness is a rule for what order to put bytes in large values
* **big-endian convention:** first byte is the **most** significant byte (lowest position # to highest position #), right from left to right
* **little-endian convention:** first byte is the **least** significant byte (highest position # to lowest position #)
  * most CPUs use little endian today...
* what does endianness NOT affect?
  * the arrangement of the bits **within a byte**
  * 1-byte values, arrays of bytes, ASCII strings are NOT affected
  * does not affect the ordering of bytes inside the CPU, no need for "endian" arithmetic 
* only affects moving larger than 1-bytes values, between the CPU and memory or btw multiple computers


## which is better?
* as long as you're consistent, it doesn't matter
* which one is MIPS?
 * it's bi-endian - can work in either configuration
* MARS uses te endiannes of the computer it's running on <- so... little-endian
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
