# Arrays, Control Flow, and Loops

**To Do:** 

- [x] check out, retype, and play w/ the examples: https://jarrettbillingsley.github.io/teaching/classes/2201/cs0447/examples.html 

**Remember:**
* the address of an n-byte value must be a **multiple of n**

## Address Calculation 
* when we want to stor 4-byte values
  * split up across consecutive bytes
* what about a string?
  * how is a string represented?
  * how many bytes is a string? they are variable lenth
* the solution to storing it in memory is the same
* each item is stored as a sequence of bytes
  * how do we acces?
 
 ## What is an array, *really*
 * what memory address is `arry[0]`? F400 in the slides example
 * If X is the memory address, where the array starts (e.g., X = Fx400)
    * X[i] = X + b * i (start at the address X and add the offset [i] times the number of b bytes) <-- this is called "scaling"
      * In assembly you have to do the scaling yourself
    * only part of the answer
 * an int is always 4 bytes, one word
 * one word = 4 bytes = 4x8 = 32 bits
 
 ## Having trouble with Mars
 * in command prompt go to folder Mars is downloaded in
 * `java -jar Mars...` hit tab 
 
 # Arrays in MIPS
* Printing values in Array
  * in high level language for loop:

```
for (int i = 0; ; i < length; i++)
  print (data[c])
```
* Information:
  * A = data
  * B = 4
  * i = c (i is the thing within the index, within the brackets)
* **data** is an array of **words**, so how big is each item (B)? 4-bytes
* address of item i = data + (c * 4) 

## Making an array in MIPS

* Step one: make space
  * `little_array: .word 1, 2, 3, 4 # label .data_type stuff, in, array`
  * `big_array: .word 0xBEEFCODE:100 # label .data_type (onehundred copies of BEEFCODE)`
  * side note: `.asciiz` is a data type, it's zero terminating
* Step two: put an address in a register
  * `la t0, little_array # adds the little_array into the register` 
    * `la` stands for "load address", but it's not a load operation... it's weird.
* All together:

```
.data
  little_array: .word 1, 2, 3, 4 # label .data_type stuff, in, array
  big_array: .word 0xBEEFCODE:100 # label .data_type (onehundred copies of BEEFCODE)

.text
 .globl main
  main: 
    la t0, little_array

    # t0 is A.
    # I wanna do A + 4 * 3
    # 3 is the index of the array we want to print

    add t0, t0, 12

    # now t0 is A + 12
    
    # must be loaded into a0, since that's the argument v0 takes: 
    # https://courses.missouristate.edu/KenVollmar/MARS/Help/SyscallHelp.html
    
    lw a0, (t0) # t0 contains an address. load from the address is register t0
    
    # now a0 is the value of little_array[3]
    
    li v0, 1 # one selects the print int call
    
    syscall # prints the 4 within the array
    
```

* `sw t1, (100)` # store the value of t1 into memory (STORES ARE BACKWARDS)

* **TIP**: Add notes in comments on what is in each register, will make code much easier to write
* when we put the (t0) in parenthesis, the thing in side address, go to memory and load that thing
 * how does the CPU know that t0 holds an address? it doesn't.

## Intermission: Data Transfer
* differ on the size of the integer
* whether the integer is sign extended
 * `li` adds a constant
 * `la` adds a constant address (of an address)
 
 
 * you can have a variable whose value is an address (i.e., a pointer)
 * the address of an n-byte value must be a **multiple of n** <-- memorize this
  * why do we do this? it's simpler and faster
  
 # Control Flow
 
